CHAPTER 2: **TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS**
===============================================

Variables and constants are the basic data objects manipulated in a program. Declarations list the variables to be used, and state what type they
have and perhaps what their initial values are. Operators specify what is to
be do'ne to them. Expressions combine variables and constants to produce
new values. These are the topics of this chapter.

**2.1 Variable Names**

Although we didn't come right out and say so, there are some restrictions on variable and symbolic constant names. Names are made up of
letters and digits; the first character must be a letter. The underscore "\_"
counts as a letter; it is useful for improving the readability of long variable
names. Upper and lower case are different; traditional C practice is to use
lower case for variable names, and all upper case for symbolic constants.

Only the first eight characters of an internal name are significant,
although more may be used. For external names such as function names
and external variables, the number may be less than eight, because external
names are used by various assemblers and loaders. Appendix A lists details.
Furthermore, keywords like if, else, int, float, etc., are _reserved:_ you
can't use them as variable names. (They must be in lower case.)

Naturally it's wise to choose variable names that mean something, that
are related to the purpose of the variable, and that are unlikely to get mixed
up typographically.

**2.2 Data Types and Sizes**

There are only a few basic data types in C:

33

[comment]: <> (page 34 , 34 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

    char a single byte, capable of holding one character
in the local character set.

    int an integer, typically reflecting the natural size
of integers on the host machine.

    float single-precision floating point.

    double double-precision floating point.

In addition, there are a number of qualifiers which can be applied to
    int's: short, long, and unsigned. short and long refer to different
sizes of integers, unsigned numbers obey the laws of arithmetic modulo
2, where _n_ is the number of bits in an int; unsigned numbers are
always positive. The declarations for the qualifiers look like

    short int x;

    long int y;

    unsigned int z;

The word int can be omitted in such situations, and typically is.

The precision of these objects depends on the machine at hand; the

table below shows some representative values.

DEC PDP-11 Honeywell 6000 IBM 370 Interdata 8/32

ASCII ASCII EBCDIC ASCII

    char 8 bits 9 bits 8 bits 8 bits

    int 16 36 32 32

    short 16 36 16 16

    long 32 36 32 32

    float 32 36 32 32

    double 64 72 64 64

The intent is that short and long should provide different lengths of
integers where practical; int will normally reflect the most "natural" size
for a particular machine. As you can see, each compiler is free to interpret
short and long as appropriate for its own hardware. About all you should
count on is that short is no longer than long.

**2.3 Constants**

int and float constants have already been disposed of, except to note
that the usual

123.456e-7

or

0.12E3

"scientific" notation for float's is also legal. Every floating point constant

[comment]: <> (page 35 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS 35 )

is taken to be double, so the "e" notation serves for both float and
    double.

Long constants are written in the style 1 23L. An ordinary integer constant that is too long to fit in an **int** is also taken to be a long.

There is a notation for octal and hexadecimal constants: a leading 0
(zero) on an **int** constant implies octal; a leading Ox or OX indicates hexadecimal. For example, decimal 31 can be written as 037 in octal and 0 x1 f
or 0 X1 **F** in hex. Hexadecimal and octal constants may also be followed by
L to make them long.

A _character constant_ is a single character written within single quotes, as
in'x'. The value of a character constant is the numeric value of the character in the machine's character set. For example, in the ASCII character set
the character zero, or'O', is 48, and in EBCDIC 'O' is 240, both quite
different from the numeric value 0. Writing 0 instead of a numeric value
like 48 or 240 makes the program independent of the particular value.
Character constants participate in numeric operations just as any other
numbers, although they are most often used in comparisons with other characters. A later section treats conversion rules.

Certain non-graphic characters can be represented in character constants
by escape sequences like \n (newline), \t (tab), \0 (null), \\ (backslash),
\' (single quote), etc., which look like two characters, but are actually only
one. In addition, an arbitrary byte-sized bit pattern can be generated by
writing

_'\ddd_

where _ddd_ is one to three octal digits, as in

**#define FORMFEED '\014' /\* ASCII form feed \*/**

The character constant \ represents the character with value zero.

' \0' is often written instead of 0 to emphasize the character nature of
some expression.

A _constant expression_ is an expression that involves only constants. Such
expressions are evaluated at compile time, rather than run time, and accordingly may be used in any place that a constant may be, as in

**#define MAXLINE 1000**

**char line[MAXLINE+1];**

or

**seconds = 60 \* 60 \* hours;**

A _string constant_ is a sequence of zero or more characters surrounded by
    double quotes, as in

**"I am a string"**

[comment]: <> (page 36 , 36 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

or

    /* a null string */

The quotes are not part of the string, but serve only to delimit it. The same
escape sequences used for character constants apply in strings; \" represents
the double quote character.

Technically, a string is an array whose elements are single characters.
The compiler automatically places the null character \O at the end of each
such string, so programs can conveniently find the end. This representation
means that there is no real limit to how long a string can be, but programs
have to scan one completely to determine its length. The physical storage
required is one more location than the number of characters written
between the quotes. The following function **strlen** **( s )** returns the length
of a character string **s,** excluding the terminal \O.

    strlen(s) /* return length of s */

    char s[];

    int i;

    i = 0;

    while (s[i]

    ++i;

    return(i);

}

Be careful to distinguish between a character constant and a string that
contains a single character: x' is not the same as "x". The former is a
single character, used to produce the numeric value of the letter x in the
machine's character set. The latter is a character string that contains one
    character (the letter x) and a \0.

**2.4 Declarations**

All variables must be declared before use, although certain declarations
can be made implicitly by context. A declaration specifies a type, and is followed by a list of one or more variables of that type, as in

    int lower, upper, step;

    char c, line[1000];

Variables can be distributed among declarations in any fashion; the lists
above could equally well be written as

[comment]: <> (page 37 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS 37 )

**int lower;**

**int upper;**

**int step;**

**char c;**

**char line [1000] ;**

This latter form takes more room, but is convenient for adding a comment
to each declaration or for subsequent modifications.

Variables may also be initialized in their declaration, although there are
some restrictions. If the name is followed by an equals sign and a constant,
that serves as an initializer, as in

**char backslash =**

**int i = 0;**

**float eps = 1.0e-5;**

If the variable in question is external or static, the initialization is done
once only, conceptually before the program starts executing. Explicitly initialized automatic variables are initialized each time the function they are in
is called. Automatic variables for which there is no explicit initializer have
undefined (i.e., garbage) values. External and static variables are initialized
to zero by default, but it is good style to state the initialization anyway.

We will discuss initialization further as new data types are introduced.

**2.5 Arithmetic Operators**

The binary arithmetic operators are +, \*, /, and the modulus opera-

tor %. There is a unary —, but no unary +.

Integer division truncates any fractional part. The expression

**x % y**

produces the remainder when **x** is divided by y, and thus is zero when y
divides **x** exactly. For example, a year is a leap year if it is divisible by 4
but not by 100, except that years divisible by 400 _are_ leap years. Therefore

**if (year % 4 == 0 &amp;&amp; year % 100 != 0 I I year % 400 == 0)**

_it's a leap year_

**else**

_it's not_

The % operator cannot be applied to **float** or **double.**

The + and — operators have the same precedence, which is lower than
the (identical) precedence of \*, /, and %, which are in turn lower than
unary minus. Arithmetic operators group left to right. (A table at the end
of this chapter summarizes precedence and associativity for all operators.)
The order of evaluation is not specified for associative and commutative
operators like \* and +; the compiler may rearrange a parenthesized computation involving one of these. Thus **a+ (b+c)** can be evaluated as

[comment]: <> (page 38 , 38 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

(a+b) +c. This rarely makes any difference, but if a particular order is
required, explicit temporary variables must be used.

The action taken on overflow or underflow depends on the machine at
hand.

**2.6 Relational and Logical Operators**

The relational operators are

\&gt; \&gt;= \&lt; \&lt;=

They all have the same precedence. Just below them in precedence are the
equality operators:

== !=

which have the same precedence. Relationals have lower precedence than
arithmetic operators, so expressions like ± \&lt; im-1 are taken as

**\&lt; ) ,** as would be expected.

More interesting are the logical connectives &amp;&amp; and I I . Expressions
connected by &amp;&amp; or I **I** are evaluated left to right, and evaluation stops as
soon as the truth or falsehood of the result is known. These properties are
critical to writing programs that work. For example, here is a loop from the
input function **getline** which we wrote in Chapter 1.

**for (1=0; i\&lt;lim-1 &amp;&amp; (c=getchar()) != '\n' &amp;&amp; c I= EOF; ++i)**
**s[i] = c;**

Clearly, before reading a new character it is necessary to check that there is
room to store it in the array s, so the test i\&lt;lim-1 _must_ be made first.
Not only that, but if this test fails, we must not go on and read another
    character.

Similarly, it wOUld be unfortunate if **c** were tested against **EOF** before
**getchar** was called: the call must occur before the character in **c** is tested.

The precedence of fs,,s, is greater than that of **I** I, and both are lower
than relational and equality operators, so expressions like

**&amp;&amp;** **(c = getchar()) != '\n' &amp;&amp; c != EOF**

need no extra parentheses. But since the precedence of ! = is higher than
assignment, parentheses are needed in

    (c **= getchar())**

to achieve the desired result.

The unary negation operator ! converts a non-zero or true operand into
0, and a zero or false operand into 1. A common use of ! is in constructions like

[comment]: <> (page 39 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS 39 )

    if (!inword)

rather than

    if (inword == 0)

It's hard to generalize about which form is better. Constructions like
! inword read quite nicely ("if not in word"), but more complicated ones
can be hard to understand.

**Exercise 2-1.** Write a loop equivalent to the for loop above without using
&amp;&amp;. LI

**2.7 Type Conversions**

When operands of different types appear in expressions, they are converted to a common type according to a small number of rules. In general,
the only conversions that happen automatically are those that make sense,
such as converting an integer to floating point in an expression like f + i.
Expressions that don't make sense, like using a float as a subscript, are
disallowed.

First, char's and it's may be freely intermixed in arithmetic expressions: every char in an expression is automatically converted to an int.
This permits considerable flexibility in certain kinds of character transformations. One is exemplified by the function atoi, which converts a string of
digits into its numeric equivalent.

    atoi(s) /* convert s to integer */

    char s[];

    int i, n;

    n = 0;

for (i = 0; s[i] \&gt;= '0' &amp;&amp; s[i] \&lt;= '9'; ++i)

    n = 10 * n + s[i] - '0';

    return (n);

As we discussed in Chapter 1, the expression

s[i] - '0'

gives the numeric value of the character stored in s [ii because the values
of'0', 1 , etc., form a contiguous increasing positive sequence.

Another example of char to int conversion is the function lower
which maps a single character to lower case _for the ASCII character set only._
If the character is not an upper case letter, lower returns it unchanged.

[comment]: <> (page 40 , 40 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

**lower(c) /\* convert c to lower case; ASCII only \*/**
**int c;**

**if (c \&gt;= 'A' &amp;&amp; c \&lt;= 'Z')**

    **return(c + 'a' - 'A');**

**else**

    **return(c);**

This works for ASCII because corresponding upper case and lower case
letters are a fixed distance apart as numeric values and each alphabet is contiguous — there is nothing but letters between _A_ and _Z._ This latter observation is _not_ true of the EBCDIC character set (IBM 360/370), so this code
fails on such systems — it converts more than letters.

There is one subtle point about the conversion of characters to integers.
The language does not specify whether variables of type **char** are signed or
unsigned quantities. When a **char** is converted to an **int,** can it ever produce a _negative_ integer? Unfortunately, this varies from machine to
machine, reflecting differences in architecture. On some machines (PDP-11,
for instance), a **char** whose leftmost bit is 1 will be converted to a negative
integer ("sign extension"). On others, a **char** is promoted to an int by
adding zeros at the left end, and thus is always positive.

The definition of C guarantees that any character in the machine's standard character set will never be negative, so these characters may be used
freely in expressions as positive quantities. But arbitrary bit patterns stored
in character variables may appear to be negative on some machines, yet
positive on others.

The most common occurrence of this situation is when the value —1 is
used for **EOF.** Consider the code

**char c;**

    **c = getchar();**

    **if (c == EOF)**

On a machine which does not do sign extension, c is always positive
because it is a **char,** yet **EOF** is negative. As a result, the test always fails.
To avoid this, we have been careful to use **int** instead of **char** for any
variable which holds a value returned by **getchar.**

The real reason for using int instead of **char** is not related to any
questions of possible sign extension. It is simply that **getchar** must return
all possible characters (so that it can be used to read arbitrary input) and, in
addition, a distinct **EOF** value. Thus its value _cannot_ be represented as a
**char,** but must instead be stored as an int.

[comment]: <> (page 41 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS 41 )

Another useful form of automatic type conversion is that relational
expressions like i \&gt; j and logical expressions connected by &amp;&amp; and I **I** are
defined to have value 1 if true, and 0 if false. Thus the assignment

**isdigit = c \&gt;= ' 0 ' &amp;&amp; c \&lt;= '9';**

sets **isdigit** to 1 if **c** is a digit, and to 0 if not. (In the test part of **if,**
**while, for,** etc., "true" just means "non-zero.")

Implicit arithmetic conversions work much as expected. In general, if
an operator like + or \* which takes two operands (a "binary operator") has
operands of different types, the "lower" type is _promoted_ to the "higher"
type before the operation proceeds. The result is of the higher type. More
precisely, for each arithmetic operator, the following sequence of conversion
rules is applied.

**char** and **short** are converted to **int,** and **float** is converted to
**double.**

Then if either operand is **double,** the other is converted to
**double,** and the result is **double.**

Otherwise if either operand is long, the other is converted to
    long, and the result is long.

Otherwise if either operand is unsigned, the other is converted to
    unsigned, and the result is unsigned.

Otherwise the operands must be int, and the result is **int.**

Notice that all **float's in** an expression are converted to **double;** all floating point arithmetic in C is done in double precision.

Conversions take place across assignments; the value of the right side is
converted to the type of the left, which is the type of the result. A character is converted to an integer, either by sign extension or not, as described
above. The reverse operation, int to **char, is well-behaved —** excess
high-order bits are simply discarded. Thus in

**int i;**

**char c;**

I = **c;**

**c = i;**

the value of **c** is unchanged. This is true whether or not sign extension is

involved.

If **x is float and i is int, then**

x= i

**and**

[comment]: <> (page 42 , 42 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

i = **x**

both cause conversions; float to int causes truncation of any fractional
part. double is converted to float by rounding. Longer it's are converted to shorter ones or to **char's** by dropping the excess high-order bits.

Since a function argument is an expression, type conversions also take
place when arguments are passed to functions: in particular, **char** and
**short** become **int,** and **float** becomes **double.** This is why we have
declared function arguments to be **int** and double even when the function is called with **char** and **float.**

    Finally, explicit type conversions can be forced ("coerced") in any
expression with a construct called a _cast._ In the construction

    _(type-name) expression_

the _expression_ is converted to the named type by the conversion rules above.
The precise meaning of a cast is in fact as if _expression_ were assigned to a
variable of the specified type, which is then used in place of the whole construction. For example, the library routine **sqrt** expects a double argument, and will produce nonsense if inadvertently handed something else.
So if n is an integer,

    **sqrt ( (double) n)**

converts n to double before passing it to **sqrt.** (Note that the cast produces the _value_ of n in the proper type; the actual content of n is not
altered.) The cast operator has the same precedence as other unary operators, as summarized in the table at the end of this chapter.

**Exercise 2-2.** Write the function **htoi (s ) ,** which converts a string of
hexadecimal digits into its equivalent integer value. The allowable digits are
0 through **9, a** through **f, and A** through **F. 1=1**

**2.8 Increment and Decrement Operators**

C provides two unusual operators for incrementing and decrementing
variables. The increment operator ++ adds 1 to its operand; the decrement
operator -- subtracts 1. We have frequently used ++ to increment variables, as in

    **if (c == \n')**

**++nl;**

The unusual aspect is that ++ and -- may be used either as prefix
operators (before the variable, as in **++n),** or postfix (after the variable:
n++). In both cases, the effect is to increment n. But the expression **++n**
increments **n** _before_ using its value, while **n++** increments **n** _after_ its value
has been used. This means that in a context where the value is being used,

[comment]: <> (page 43 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS **43** )

not just the effect, **++n** and n++ are different. If n is 5, then

x **= n++;**

sets x to 5, but

x **= ++**** n;**

sets x to 6. In both cases, n becomes 6. The increment and decrement
operators can only be applied to variables; an expression like **x=(i+j)++** is
illegal.

In a context where no value is wanted, just the incrementing effect, as
in

**if (c ==**

**nl++;**

choose prefix or postfix according to taste. But there are situations where
one or the other is specifically called for. For instance, consider the function **squeeze (s, c)** which removes all occurrences of the character **c**
from the string **s.**

    **squeeze(s, c) /* delete all c from s */**

**char s[];**

**int c;**

**{**

**int i,**  **j;**

    **for (i** **= j = 0; s[i] != '\0'; i++)**

    **if (s[i] != c)**

    s [j++] = s [i] ;

    s[j] = 'VP;

)

Each time a non-c occurs, it is copied into the current j position, and only
then is j incremented to be ready for the next character. This is exactly
equivalent to

    **if (s[i] != c) (**

**s[j] = s[i];**

**j++;**

}

Another example of a similar construction comes from the **getline**
function which we wrote in Chapter I, where we can replace

**if (c ==**

**s[i] = c;**

)

by the more compact

[comment]: <> (page 44 , 44 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

    if (c ==

    s[i++] = c;

As a third example, the function strcat(s) t) concatenates the
string t to the end of the string s. strcat assumes that there is enough
space in s to hold the combination.

    strcat(s, t) /* concatenate t to end of s */

    char s[], t[]; /* s must be big enough */

{

    int i, j;

    i = j = 0;

    while (s[i] != '\0') /* find end of s */

    i++;

    while ((s[i++] = t[j++]) != '\0') /* copy t */

    ;

)

As each character is copied from t to s, the postfix ++ is applied to both i
and j to make sure that they are in position for the next pass through the
loop.

**Exercise 2-3.** Write an alternate version of squeeze (s1, s2) which
deletes each character in s1 which matches any character in the _string_ s2.
ID

**Exercise 2-4.** Write the function any (s1, s2) which returns the first
location in the string s1 where any character from the string s2 occurs, or
—1 if s1 contains no characters from s2. El

**2.9 Bitwise Logical Operators**

C provides a number of operators for bit manipulation; these may not
be applied to float or double.

&amp; bitwise AND

I bitwise inclusive OR

A bitwise exclusive OR

« left shift

» right shift

    one's complement (unary)

The bitwise AND operator &amp; is often used to mask off some set of bits; for
example,

    c = n &amp; 0177;

sets to zero all but the low-order 7 bits of n. The bitwise OR operator I is
used to turn bits on:

[comment]: <> (page 45 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS **45** )

**x = x I MASK;**

sets to one in **x** the bits that are set to one in **MASK.**

You should carefully distinguish the bitwise operators &amp; and I from the
logical connectives &amp;&amp; and I I, which imply left-to-right evaluation of a
truth value. For example, if **x** is 1 and **y** is 2, then **x &amp; y** is zero while
    x &amp;&amp; y is one. (Why?)

The shift operators « and » perform left and right shifts of their left
operand by the number of bit positions given by the right operand. Thus
x « 2 shifts **x** left by two positions, filling vacated bits with 0; this is
equivalent to multiplication by 4. Right shifting an unsigned quantity fills
vacated bits with 0. Right shifting a signed quantity will fill with sign bits
("arithmetic shift") on some machines such as the **PDP**** - ****11,** and with 0-bits
    ("logical shift") on others.

The unary operator - yields the one's complement of an integer; that is,
it converts each 1-bit into a 0-bit and vice versa. This operator typically
finds use in expressions like

**x &amp;**  **-**** 077**

which masks the last six bits of **x** to zero. Note that x &amp; -077 is independent of word length, and is thus preferable to, for example, **x &amp; 0177700,**
which assumes that **x** is a 16-bit quantity. The portable form involves no
extra cost, since -077 is a constant expression and thus evaluated at compile time.

To illustrate the use of some of the bit operators, consider the function

**getbits p,** n) which returns (right adjusted) the n-bit field of **x**

that begins at position p. We assume that bit position 0 is at the right end
and that **n** and p are sensible positive values. For example,
**getbits (x, 4****) **** 3)** returns the three bits in bit positions 4, 3 and 2, right
adjusted.

**getbits(x, p, n) /\* get n bits from position p \*/**
**unsigned x, p, n;**

**return((x \&gt;\&gt; (p+1-n)) &amp;**  **-**** ( ****-**** 0 \&lt;\&lt; n));**

**x \&gt;\&gt;** **(p+1**  **-**** n)** moves the desired field to the right end of the word.
Declaring the argument **x** to be **unsigned** ensures that when it is right-
shifted, vacated bits will be filled with zeros, not sign bits, regardless of the
machine the program is run on. -0 is all 1-bits; shifting it left **n** bit positions with -0 « **n** creates a mask with zeros in the rightmost n bits and
ones everywhere else; complementing that with - makes a mask with ones
in the rightmost **n** bits.

[comment]: <> (page 46 , 46 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

**Exercise 2-5.** Modify getbits to number bits from left to right. LI

**Exercise 2-6.** Write a function word length ( ) which computes the word
length of the host machine, that is, the number of bits in an **int.** The
function should be portable, in the sense that the same source code works
on all machines.

**Exercise 2-7.** Write the function **rightrot (n****) **** b)** which rotates the
    integer n to the right by b bit positions.

**Exercise 2-8.** Write the function **invert (x****) **** p,** n) which inverts (i.e.,
changes 1 into 0 and vice versa) the **n** bits of **x** that begin at position p,
leaving the others unchanged.

**2.10 Assignment Operators and Expressions**

Expressions such as

= + **2**

in which the left hand side is repeated on the right can be written in the
compressed form

**+= 2**

using an _assignment operator_ like +=.

Most binary operators (operators like + which have a left and right

operand) have a corresponding assignment operator _op=,_ where _op_ is one of

    + - * / % « » &amp;

If _el_ and _e2_ are expressions, then

_el op= e2_

is equivalent to

    _el = (el) op (e2)_

except that _el_ is computed only once. Notice the parentheses around _e2:_

\*= y + 1

is actually

    x = x * _(y + 1)_

rather than

**x=x\*y+**

As an example, the function bitcount counts the number of 1-bits in
its integer argument.

[comment]: <> (page 47 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS 47 )

    bitcount(n) /* count 1 bits in n */

    unsigned n;

    int b;

for (b = 0; n I= 0; n \&gt;\&gt;= 1)

    if (n &amp; 01)

    b++;

    return(b);

}

Quite apart from conciseness, assignment operators have the advantage
that they correspond better to the way people think. We say "add 2 to i"
or "increment i by 2," not "take 1, add 2, then put the result back in
Thus ± += 2. In addition, for a complicated expression like

yyval[yypv[p3+p4] + yypv[p1+p2]] += 2

the assignment operator makes the code easier to understand, since the
reader doesn't have to check painstakingly that two long expressions are
indeed the same, or to wonder why they're not. And an assignment operator may even help the compiler to produce more efficient code.

We have already used the fact that the assignment statement has a value
and can occur in expressions; the most common example is

    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)

- • •

    Assignments using the other assignment operators (+=, —=, etc.) can also

occur in expressions, although it is a less frequent occurrence.

The type of an assignment expression is the type of its left operand.

**Exercise 2-9.** In a 2's complement number system, x &amp; ( x-1 ) deletes the
rightmost 1-bit in **x.** (Why?) Use this observation to write a faster version
of bitcount.

**2.11 Conditional Expressions**

The statements

    if (a > b)

    z = a;

    else

    z = b;

of course compute in z the maximum of a and b. The _conditional expres­_
_sion,_ written with the ternary operator "? : ", provides an alternate way to
write this and similar constructions. In the expression

[comment]: <> (page 48 , 48 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

_el ? e2 : e3_

the expression _el_ is evaluated first. If it is non-zero (true), then the expression _e2_ is evaluated, and that is the value of the conditional expression.
Otherwise _e3_ is evaluated, and that is the value. Only one of _e2_ and _e3_ is
evaluated. Thus to set z to the maximum of **a** and b,

**z = (a \&gt; b) ? a : b; /\* z = max(a, b) \*/**

It should be noted that the conditional expression is indeed an expression, and it can be used just as any other expression. If _e2_ and _e3_ are of
different types, the type of the result is determined by the conversion rules
discussed earlier in this chapter. For example, if **f** is a **float,** and n is an
    int, then the expression

    **(n >** **0) ? f :**  **n**

is of type **double** regardless of whether n is positive or not.

Parentheses are not necessary around the first expression of a conditional expression, since the precedence of ? : is very low, just above assignment. They are advisable anyway, however, since they make the condition
part of the expression easier to see.

The conditional expression often leads to succinct code. For example,
this loop prints **N** elements of an array, 10 per line, with each column
separated by one blank, and with each line (including the last) terminated by
exactly one newline.

    **for (i = 0; i < N; i++)**

**printf("%6d%c", a[i], (i%10==9 II i==N-1) ? '\n' :**" ) ;

A newline is printed after every tenth element, and after the N-th. All other
elements are followed by one blank. Although this might look tricky, it's
instructive to try to write it without the conditional expression.

**Exercise 2-10.** Rewrite the function lower, which converts upper case
letters to lower case, with a conditional expression instead of **if**** — ****else.** El

**2.12 Precedence and Order of Evaluation**

The table below summarizes the rules for precedence and associativity
of all operators, including those which we have not yet discussed. Operators
on the same line have the same precedence; rows are in order of decreasing
precedence, so, for example, \*, /, and % all have the same precedence,
which is higher than that of + and —.

[comment]: <> (page 49 , CHAPTER 2 TYPES, OPERATORS AND EXPRESSIONS **49** )

| Operator | | | | Associativity |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | ( ) | [] -> . | | | | left to right |
| ! | - ++ -- - _( type )_ | _\*_ | _&amp;_ | **sizeof** | right to left |
| \* | / % | | | | left to right |
| + | - | | | | left to right |
| « | \&gt;\&gt; | | | | left to right |
| \&lt; | \&lt;= \&gt; \&gt;= | | | | left to right |
| == | ! = | | | | left to right |
| &amp; | | | | | left to right |
| | | | | | left to right |
| I | | | | | left to right |
| &amp;&amp; | | | | | left to right |
| I **I** | | | | | left to right |
| ? : | | | | | right to left |
| = | += -= etc. | | | | right to left |
    | , | (Chapter 3) | | | | left to right |

The operators -\&gt; and . are used to access members of structures; they will
be covered in Chapter 6, along with **sizeof** (size of an object). Chapter 5
    discusses * (indirection) and &amp; (address of).

Note that the precedence of the bitwise logical operators &amp;, A and **I** falls
below == and ! =. This implies that bit-testing expressions like

    **if ( (x &amp; MASK) ==** **0) ...**

must be fully parenthesized to give proper results.

As mentioned before, expressions involving one of the associative and
    commutative operators (*, +, &amp;, ^, I ) can be rearranged even when
parenthesized. In most cases this makes no difference whatsoever; in situations where it might, explicit temporary variables can be used to force a particular order of evaluation.

C, like most languages, does not specify in what order the operands of
an operator are evaluated. For example, in a statement like

    x = **f +** **g();**

**f** may be evaluated before g or vice versa; thus if either **f or** g alters an
external variable that the other depends on, x can depend on the order of
evaluation. Again, intermediate results can be stored in temporary variables
to ensure a particular sequence.

[comment]: <> (page 50 , 50 THE C PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE CHAPTER 2 )

Similarly, the order in which function arguments are evaluated is not
specified, so the statement

**printf("%d %d\n", ++n, power(2, n)); /\* WRONG \*/**

    can (and does) produce different results on different machines, depending
on whether or not n is incremented before power is called. The solution,
of course, is to write

**++n;**

    **printf("%d %d\n", n, power(2, n));**

Function calls, nested assignment statements, and increment and decrement operators cause "side effects" — some variable is changed as a byproduct of the evaluation of an expression. In any expression involving side
effects, there can be subtle dependencies on the order in which variables
taking part in the expression are stored. One unhappy situation is typified
by the statement

**a[i] = i++;**

The question is whether the subscript is the old value of i or the new. The
compiler can do this in different ways, and generate different answers
depending on its interpretation. When side effects (assignment to actual
variables) takes place is left to the discretion of the compiler, since the best
order strongly depends on machine architecture.

The moral of this discussion is that writing code which depends on order
of evaluation is a bad programming practice in any language. Naturally, it is
necessary to know what things to avoid, but if you don't know _how_ they are
done on various machines, that innocence may help to protect you. (The C
verifier _lint_ will detect most dependencies on order of evaluation.)


