The lack of a "heap" or "garbage collection" feature in C is both one of the great 
strengths of the language and at the same time is likely reason that the average
programmer will never develop or maintain a major C application during their career.

C provides a simple feature using the `malloc()` and `free()` functions that allows
a programmer to request a certain amount of memory be allocated dynamically, use
the memory and then return the memory to the C runtime library for later reuse.
For example to convert a JPG image to a PNG image, our application will read the JPG 
data into memory, then convert the image into a PNG image in memory and then write the
PNG data out to a file.  We don't know how large the images will be in advance, so we
request whatever size we need from C and then give it back when we are done.

The term "heap" refers to memory that C manages on our behalf when we need 
to "borrow" a bit of memory and give it back later.  There are a couple of issues 
with a simple heap implementation.  First, if we "forget" to call `free()`
when we are done with the memory, we have created a "memory leak" and our program
eventually will run out of memory and abort.  C places the onus of giving back any
dynamically allocated memory on the programmer.  Modern languages like Java, 
JavaScript, and Python keep track of when we stop using a segment of dynamic memory
using a layer that can automatically reclaim the memory.

The more difficult problem is after a series of calls to `malloc()` and `free()` the
heap space becomes fragmented and some cleanup is needed.   This clean up is called
"garbage collection".  Efficient memory allocation and garbage collection has been 
the subject of decades of computer science research.  The Java language has built
a number of increasingly effective garbage collection approaches over the years.

Kernighan and Ritchie in one simple paragaph define most of the problem as out
of scope for the C language.  Which makes it a bit challenging for us to
make good use of dyanamic memory allocation in C - but when we do it properly - it 
performs very well.

If you are using a language like Java, Python, or PHP, every time you create a new string
through concatenation without thinking about memory allocation, remember to appreciate
the decades of work by computer scientists that made it easy for you.  Kernighan
and Ritchie knew "garbage collection" was difficult.  So they left it out of the
C language and put it into a run-time library.

