Understanding the capabilities and limitations of C arrays is one of the the most important topics in
our historical look at the C Programming language.
Most importantly, the number of elements in an array declaration must be a *constant* at compile time and the size of an array
*cannot* be adjusted using an array declaration while the program is running.

This inability to automatically resize C arrays as data is added, leads to a class of security flaws in software that are generally referred to
as ["buffer overflow"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffer_overflow) where a program reads more data than can fit
into an array and starts overwriting other data or code and compromising an application.

Later in the book, we will later dynamic create array-like 
structures in C using pointers and the standard library `malloc()` and `realloc()` functions.

Python has support for non-dynamic arrays (buffers).  Python buffers are generally not used except for programmers
writing library code that talks to low-level code written in a language other than Python or talking to the operating system
such as Linux.  The more commonly used Python `list` and `dict` structures *can* change their sizes automatically 
as elements are added and deleted at run-time.

Java has support for non-dynamic arrays like C which are given a length at the moment they are created and the array length cannot
be increased nor decreased without making a new array and copying all the elements from the first to the second array.
Java provides `list` and `map` structures that automatically adjust their length as data is added or removed.  Java has a class
called an `ArrayList` which can be dynamically extended but provides array-like linear access.  It *is* a list
internally but can be *used* like an array externally.

The underlying technique that is used to implement language structures like Python's `list` is dynamic memory allocation
and a "linked list" structure.  Linked lists are one of the most important data structures in all of Computer Science.
We cover dynamic allocation and implementing data structures in C in [Chapter 6](chap06.md).

So for now, we will examine the syntax of C arrays - but keep in mind that allocating an array in C is very different
than creating a `list` in Python.
