It may seem strange that the authors are calling so much attention to the fact
that function arguments are passed "call by value" in the first chapter.  Most modern programming
languages like Python, PHP, or Java pass in single value arguments "by value" by default
and to pass in an argument "by reference", you need to do something special
like adding the `&` in the function declaration in PHP.

Passing by reference was the norm before C and passing by value was the norm after C.
Since modern languages were deeply influenced by (and often written in) C, passing by value is the norm
for modern languages.  It is nice because it isolates the data in the calling code
from the called code - so the called code can't easily mess with its arguments and create
an unexpected side effect (and possibly a bug / security flaw) in the calling code.

It was a bit of work to make pass by value work in C. C implements a "call stack" where
a bit of memory is allocated at each function call and C makes a copy of the values in the calling
code to pass them into the called code in a way that the calling code can see the values
and change their local copies without affecting the values in the calling code.  

The same "call stack" that made it possible for C function arguments to be passed by value,
also made it possible for a function to call itself recursively.  FORTRAN functions could not
be called recursively until the 1990 version of FORTRAN.

If you know your Python, you know that simple variables like integers and strings are
passed by value while structured data like dictionaries and lists are passed by
reference (i.e. the called function can modify its arguments).  We will see this
in C as well.

Talking about "call stacks", "recursive functions", and the fact that arrays and structures 
are called by reference is jumping ahead somewhat, so for now lets just understand the author's
point that normal values like integers and floats are "passed by value" in C.

lets just remember that 
