One of the great debates of the 1970's was how to use 
[Structured Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structured_programming)
to avoid any use of "goto" statements
that lead to completely unreadable "spaghetti code".  Structured code was easier to read, debug, and validate.
Structured code advocated for if-then-else, else if, while-do loops and do-while loops where the loop exit test
was at the bottom or top of loops.

There was a move from 
[Flow Charts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flowchart) with lines, boxes and arrows to structured
diagramming techniques like
[Nassi–Shneiderman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nassi-Shneiderman_diagram) diagrams that used
nested boxes to emphasise the strutured nature of the code.

The proponents of each approach tended to approach the problme based on the language they used.  ALGOL and PASCAL programmers
were strong advocates of structured programming and those languages had syntax that encouraged the approach.
FORTRAN programmers had decades of flow-shart style thinking and tended to eschew full adoption of structured programming.

Kernighan and Ritchie chose a "middle path" and made it so C could support both approaches to avoid angering either 
side of the structured programming debate.

One area where the "stuctured code" movementkept hitting a snag was implementing a loop
that reads a file and processes data until it reaches the end of file.  The loop must be able to handle an empty
file or no data at all.  There are three ways to construct a "read and process until EOF" loop and none of
the approaches are ideal.  

The loop constuctions are 
"top tested loop with priming read before the loop",
"bottom tested loop with a read as the first statement in the loop and an if-then-else as the rest of the body of the loop", 
"top tested infinite loop with a priming read and middle test/exit",
and
"top tested loop side a side effect read in the test of the loop" 
(which is the way that Kernighan and Ritchie chose to document in this chapter).

All of this serves to explain the syntax:

    while ( (c = getchar()) != EOF ) {
        /* body of the loop */
    }

This construct is a top-tested loop (which most programmers prefer) and it folds the "priming read" and put its value into the 
variable `c`.  But since the `getchar` call might also retorn `EOF` we need to check if we actually received no data at all and
need to avoid executing the body of the loop or exit the loop.

If EOF were defined as zero instead of `-1`, the loop could have been written:

    while ( c = getchar() ) {
        /* body of the loop */
    }

Now the `getchar` function returns a character or zero and the test itself is looking at the side-effect / residual value
of the assignment statement to decide to start and/or continue the loop body.  The problem with using zero as EOF
if you are reading binary (i.e. like a JPG image) data, a zero character might make perfect sense and we would not want
to incorrectly end the loop because of a zero character in the input data that is not end of file.

So we get the double parenthiesis, side effect call to `getchar` and test of the return value inside the while test.

I am quite confident that this is far more detail that you wanted here in Chapter 2, but it is as good a time as any
to understand that how much thought goes into how a programming language is designed and documented.  By the time we finish
[Chapter 3](chap03.md)
and look at the `break` and `continue` statements which are in languages like Python and Java, you will see
that this 50-year-old structured programming debate is still unresolved in the minds of many software developers.




