_Ah C, how do I love thee?  Let me count the ways._ - Dr. Chuck
with homage to [Elizabeth Barrett Browning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Barrett_Browning)

The humble [semicolon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semicolon) is why 
spacing and line-ends do not matter to C and C-like languages.
It means
we as programmers can focus all of our white space and lines on communicating our intent to humans.   This freedom is not
an excuse to write obtuse or dense code (see the [Obfuscated Perl Contest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obfuscated_Perl_Contest))
but instead freedom to describe what we mean or use spacing to help us understand our code.

We can take a quick look at how a few other C-like languages treat the semicolon.  Java is just like C in that the semicolon terminates
statements.   Python treats the semicolon as a separator - allowing more than one statement on a single line.  But since
Python treats the end of line as a statement separator - you generally never use semicolon in Python.  But for people like me
who automatically add a semicolon when typing code too fast, at least Python ignores the few semicolons I add to my code out of habit.
JavaScript treats semicolon as a separator but since JavaScript ignores the end of a line (it is whitespace), semicolons are
required when a block of code consists of more than one line.  When I write JavaScript, I meticulously include semicolons
at the end of all statements because "any good C programmer can write C in any language".


