Now that we have seen the `break` and `continue` language structures in C, and learned about "middle-tested" loops, it is time to revisit
the [Structured Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structured_programming) debate and the need for priming operations
when a program must process all data until it finishes and still handle the "there is no data at all" situation.

In the previous chapter the authors skirted the issue by using a top-tested `while` loop and a side-effect assignment
statement residual value that was compared to `EOF` to decide when to exit the loop:

    int c;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF) {
        /* process your data */
    }

Just for fun, now that we know about the `for` loop, lets rewrite this loop as a `for` loop just
to make sure who really understand how it works:

    int c;
    for (c = getchar(); c != EOF; c = getchar()) {
        ...
     }

Now you will almost never see a "read all the characters until EOF" written this way because it is not 
"K&R told us to use a while loop for this".  But the `for` formulation is probably clearer than the `while` formulation
to a reader who is not familiar with the assignment side-effect idiom.  In particular the `for` formulation does not require the
reader to understand that an assignment statement has a residual value of the value that was assigned.

The first part of the `for` is the "priming read", the second part of the `for` is the top tested exit criteria
that works both for no data at all and after all data has been read and processed, and the third part of the
`for` is done "at the bottom of the loop" to advance to the next character or encounter EOF before going back to the
top of the loop and doing the test.  The call to `getchar()` is done twice in the `for` formulation of the "read all available data"
loop and while we don't like to repeat outselves in code - if it is a small and obvious bit of code - perhaps the code is more clear
with a bit of repetition.

So with all this as background, you can take this page and sit down with a friend at a coffee shop and debate as
long as you like about which is the better formulation for the "read all available data" loop.

But if you ask Dr. Chuck's opinion, neither of these is ideal because in the real world we build data oriented loops that
usually do a lot more than get one character from standard input.  My formulation of a data loop will upset structured
programming purists - but I write code in the real world so here is my version:

    int c;
    while (1) {
        c = getchar();
        if ( c == EOF ) break;
        /* process your data */
    }

And if I wanted to skip blanks and new lines I could use both `break` *and* `continue` further angering the
structured programming purists.

    int c;
    while (1) {
        c = getchar();
        if ( c == EOF ) break;
        if ( c == ' ' || c == '\n' ) continue;
        /* process your data */
    }

I use this middle tested approach because usually the data I am processing is coming from a more complex source
than the keyboard and I don't want a function with 2-3 parameters stuck in a side effect assignment statement in
a `while` test.  Also sometimes you want to exit a loop, not just based on the return value from the function,
but instead based on the data structure that came back from the function itself.

As these "data processing loops" get more complex, the middle tested loop is a tried and true pattern.  Even Kernighan
and Ritchie point out its benefits above.

And with that, I have now triggered endless coffee shop conversations about the best way to write a data handling loop.

