Since including an array in an argument passes the *location* (or memory address) of
the array into the function, the function can change the items in the array using
array subscripts.  In particular the array *contents* are not copied when an array
is passed into a C function.  When we get to `struct`s in a future chapter - we will
find that the content of `struct`s also are passed using the address of the entire struct.
So `struct`s are passed by reference as well.

When thinking about pass by reference or pass by value, remember that a `char` variable
is a single item similar to `int` and passed by value (i.e. copied).  In C strings
are arrays of characters so they are passed by reference.

Python follows this design decision for the same (efficiency) reason as C.  Normal
single variables like `int` or `float` are copied before being passed into a function
and therefore are passed by value.  Collections like `list` or `dict` are passed into 
functions by reference and so the contents can be changed within a function.  Python
strings are not copied when being passed into a function, but the way assignments happen
in Python makes it seem like strings are passed by value (i.e. they cannot be modified).
You can learn more with a bit of web research, but the easy way is to imagine that
strings are passed by value in Python with a clever trick to avoid copying.

PHP follows the same pattern of passing numbers and strings by value and
passing arrays as reference.  PHP passes strings by value without requiring 
a copy using clever run-time code.  

Because in Java, JavaScript, and PHP strings are objects, those languages can make sure
that strings act as if they were passed by value and not passed by reference the way they
are passed in C.  

C made decisions on run-time based on getting the maximum performance out of hardware
in the 1970's at the expense of making it too easy to write code that overwrites memory
and leads to corrupted programs that have dangerous and undefined behavior.

Languages like PHP, Java, and JavaScript add a small amount of run-time overhead to 
do things like store the length of an array and make sure we programmers don't
over reference the array and overwrite random bits of our program's code or data.

The creators of C placed more priority on speed and efficient use of memory than safety.
It is like driving an automobile in the rain without ABS (Automatic Braking System).
It is fast but dangerous and should be reserved to be used by highly skilled
and very careful programmers (and drivers).

