Making sure that programmers did not blithely convert from integers to pointers was an important
part of what would become ANSI C.  The introduction of the `void` type as the lack of a type
also allowed for a pointer to a void types object (`void *`).   When a function like `alloc`
wants to return a generic pointer that can be cast to become a `char *`, the return
type of the function is `void *` in modern C dialects.

In general C assumes that all pointers are the same size in terms of storage allocation and
can be converted back and forth.  This means if you get an address of an integer, you
can re-cast it to be an address of a character.   An address is an address.

In the early days of C, the duality between integers and pointers worked well enough
because the amount of memory in early computers was relatively small.  And addresses were generally
small positive numbers that grew from zero up to possibly the maximum amount of memory
in a machine.  So if you were on a tiny system with 16-bit addresses and 32-bit integers,
if you temporarily copied a positive 16-bit address value into a 32-bit integer variable and then back
into a 16-bit address value - no accuracy would be lost in the conversion.

If we ended up with computers with more than 2GB of memory and integers were 32-bits you
could find a situation where a 64-bit address could not be copied through a 32-bit integer
without the loss of data.  So C needed to quit returning pointers as integers sometime
before 2005.  C supported the `void` type by 1980 so it was fixed with plenty of time to spare.


