In this section, we finish our quick tour of the implementations of the three core data structures in 
Computer Science: (1) the linked list, (2) the tree, and (3) the hash map (this section).  A singly linked
list is also part of a hash map implementation so you can compare it to the doubly linked list code
introduced earlier in the bonus section 6.5.1.

This section is worth understanding well because not only is it an excellent review of pointers
and structures, but also because one of the most common questions on a
face-to-face programming interview is, "draw a hash map on the whiteboard and explain how it works".
It is an easy question if you study this section of the book and almost impossible if you have not.

In some way this section is the most intricate data structure that is described in this book - it is
why it is so popular on coding interviews.  Chapters 7 and 8 talk about practical things like input/output
and the UNIX operating system.   Elegant data structures and their use are core concepts in Computer
Science - understanding them highlights the difference between a good programmer and a Computer Scientist.
In a sense, understanding how a hash map works is the "secret handshake" of Computer Science.  And it is
the secret handshake because of this book and this section of this book written back in 1978 and used in a course
that the person interviewing you took when they were in college.  Hash maps were difficult for them to understand
back then - so if you understand the concept you must be solid.

So I hope you pay close attention to this section - and remember the handshake.

