The dual nature of C and UNIX has been on display throughout the book and while this chapter is called
"The UNIX System Interface", in a sense is less about UNIX itself and very much about why C is
such a great programming language.  Let me explain.

Before UNIX and C became the norm, operating systems and operating system utilities (commands
used interactively and in batch jobs) were quite often written in the assembly language of
computer which it was supporting.   Often there were not well documented "API" calls between
utilities in assembly language and the assembly language which implemented the operating system.
Smart programmers would just look at the operating system code and write their utility code to work
with it.

This section shows that a language that has features like structures, arrays, pointers, a pre-processor,
and unions was *sufficiently rich* so that we could document all of the intricate interfaces with an operating
system using a high level language and then we could write our utility code (like `cat`) in a high level
language.

In this chapter the authors are almost shouting, "Quit using assembly language to build your
operating system and utility code!".  Further they are showing us examples designed to
answer the question that might come from programmers used to the old ways like, "Can C do XYZ?". 
Their emphatic answer in the (increasingly intricate) code samples is that "C is not a toy language
that is only something used by a few AT&T computer scientists in a research lab".

If you are doing serious system stuff that needs maximum performance and readability - use C.

This chapter shows C in all its glory and shows why it was such an important language to
enable the world of technology we have 40 years later.   At the end of the chapter we will
talk a little about how C enabled the creation of easier-to-use programming languages
and *why* it was so important to invent C-inspired languages like Python, PHP, and Java once C became
the established systems programming language.





