Actually the trademark for "UNIX" is no longer owned by AT&T - it is owned by the Open Group.  But that is
a story for another day.  The UNIX story arc includes AT&T UNIX, Berkely Software Distribution (BSD),
Sun Microsystems, Minux, Linux, Open Software Foundation (OSF), Unix International and others.  The
short version of the story is that AT&T UNIX was poised to take over the world as an open source product
before the words "open source" were spoken.  AT&T UNIX should have defined Open Source and changed everything
by the early 1980's - except for a few AT&T intellectual property lawyers.  It took over a decade for Computer
Science to pivot from a nearly exclusive focus on C and AT&T UNIX.

The Linux operating system was open source from its inception and became the standard
bearer for UNIX-like operating systems and continues to be the way most of us encounter "UNIX".   It 
is almost certain that the computer that served this media runs Linux.

But that is a story for another time.

In 1978, UNIX and C were in their glory days, and showed the entire computer science field and technology
industry the right way forward.   From that point forward hardware could evolve independently from software.
With the systems programming language and operating system patterns sorted - the previous 40 years have
seen amazing innovation in hardware capability and performance.

This 1978 "The C Programming Language" book by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie
was the "big bang" moment for modern computing and computer science.   We owe them a
debt of gratitude for making whatever we do today possible.

