DRAFT - Melissa Levine
About 7 minutes right now -- need a bit more at end
chatty non technical tone
include Raven

Dr. Chuck video talk:

Hi, my name is Melissa Levine and I am both a faculty member at the University of Michigan School of Information and a Copyright Lawyer.  You might be wondering why one of the first video lectures in a course on programming in C is from a lawyer.  Let me explain.

So you probably don’t wonder too much about where your reading assignments come from for this course. Or videos, sound recordings. Or any of the other stuff your teacher asks you to explore in this class. In many courses, you have to buy or license textbooks for example – but this course is an open educational resource. There’s no fee for the course (unless you choose to pay the pretty modest cost of the certification if you successfully complete the course). Sometimes these kinds of courses are also called MOOCs or massively open online courses. So Dr. Chuck prepares this kind of course essentially for free to the student.

When you are designing this kind of course, it is pretty easy for the teacher – like Dr Chuck – to make the decision to make the materials they create available – as they say – open access. Meaning free to you as the student – and really free to anyone who is interested. Dr. Chuck has done this for years with his Python textbook (pictures of the books and on web sites), syllabi, slides – these things are all things that he’s made. And he holds the copyright in these things as the creator – I’m simplifying some really complicated legal stuff – but under American law and in some way the law of most countries in the world – copyright exists from the moment of creation in a tangible medium of expression. There are a lot of details, say, if you are an employee whose work is to produce certain creative things, the employer holds the copyright. But let's put that aside for the moment. Copyright applies to art, music, books, articles, that scribble you wrote on a napkin at that restraint, to code, to photos, all kinds of things. Generally, today’s copyright laws all evolved from the Statute of Anne – a British law passed in 1710 that did xyz – and that spread as a model through Britain's colonies including India, South Africa, Australia, and you guessed it the US of A. The US Const  -- signed in 17 xx -- provides the foundation for US copyright. Our laws have evolved over the decades and centuries to address evolving technologies – like when photography or film were new. And they continue to evolve.

So if you hold the copyright to something, you can tell other people whether they can or can’t use something, right? Not so fast. The copyright holder  -- like Dr. Chuck here – holds certain exclusive rights but under American law – there are important limitations built right into the law. [see what may be relevant in copyright 101] Remember that stuff about the US Constitution? If you had to get permission from the copyright holder for every possible use of something – they’d have a monopoly of sorts. You might be thinking, well, it's their stuff. It seems fair to ask. And much of the time, you’d be absolutely right. But sometimes, you might have difficulty getting that permission – and if you do – you’ll have a problem using that material for things that are viewed as important areas for freedom of speech – the first amendment. It is first for a reason. It is really important. [we’re number 1]

So in a way, the way the law works is that the copyright holder has really important rights that must be respected – but there are limitations to those rights that are built right into the law. Some of them under US law include special ways that libraries can make accessible copies to help people with certain disabilities who might not otherwise be able to read print, or to make copies for classroom use, for qualified organizations – again like libraries and archives – to make copy for preservation so fragile things aren’t lost forever because things fall apart [book in shreds]. There are different parts of the copyright act that address different kinds of things that Congress for and on behalf of the American people deem of public good. One of those limitations is called fair use. Only a few countries have fair use, but the number is growing. I think it is because the need to share and be flexible in a fluid, global environment is an important advantage for countries that choose to have some form of fair use. South Korea, Israel, list… But remember those foundations of our laws that have evolved from 1710?  – the printing press was actually pretty new and it took x weeks to cross the Atlantic to go from London to New York by ship. The world was slower (even as it was getting faster- pictures of ships). Each country has its own laws that apply in its own physical territories. We have treaties that support international trade like the Berne Convention for Literary and xxx founded in 1889yr? Think of treaties as contracts between countries that help accomplish something.

I like to think of fair use as a pie [stuff from MSL Copyright 101]

So Dr. Chuck shares his stuff. He does not place it in the public domain – there’s still a copyright but he’s using open licenses like Creative Commons [see link in resources] to share with you and retain his rights. That means you can use, copy, etc as long as you provide attribution to Dr. Chuck – everybody likes to get credit for their work, right?

So what’s this got to do with this book thing and why do I have to listen to, read, or otherwise experience this little lecture about copyright in a coding class? Coding is just a bunch of numbers – numbers are facts – facts aren’t eligible for copyright? Not so fast grasshopper. Dr. Chuck is assigning you to read and use the "C Programming" book written by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie published in 1978. It's got stuff he thinks you really need to know about, like the historical context of programming and how the notion of building "portable" applications in C that would run on a wide range of computers. We take application portability for granted today in a large part because of the foundation this 1978 book laid down.   These profoundly transformational notions are not available in later books on C.  But the book is only available if you can get used paper copies [show stack of them] and Dr. Chuck has been buying whatever he can to make sure he has a high quality copy to preserve and share with you forever. Since you can’t get it from a publisher – the author and pub don’t get royalties from used book sales. [not sure I’ll include] 

[explain fair use]

Relation to coding. Recent google v oracle, other cases, software preservation problems (copier repair cases). So relation of all this to your course and how you approach your work into the future. Meanwhile, do your homework. Its good for you.





